Brian Ketelsen | Training and Consulting
    Skip to content 
    
  
    
    
      
        
        
        
          
            
              
                
                  About Me
                
                Brian Ketelsen provides training and consulting services for Go, Distributed Applications, and Container Technologies.
                Find out more 
              
              
                
                
                  Contact Me
                
                
                  
                    
                   +1(813) 434 1484
                  
                  
                    
                    me@brianketelsen.com
                  
                  
                    
                    Land O'Lakes, FL USA
                  
                
              
              
                
              
            
          
        
        
        
        
          
            
              
                
                
                
                  Open
                
                
                
                
                  
                    
                    
                    
                
              
            
          
        
      
      
      
      
        
          Search 
          Close 
        
      
      
      
      
        
          
            
              
              
                
                  BrianKetelsen
                
              
              Go Beyond
            
            
            
            
            
            
          
          
          
          
          
          
          
            
            
                Home
              
              
		Training +
              


              
		Consulting +
              

              
		Books +
              

              
		Blog +
              

              
		About +
              

            
          
        
      
    
  







  
    
	    Switching - Irony and Operating systems
      
         Back to List
      
    
    
      
      
        
        
          
            
             Nov 06

            
              Brian

          
          
            
               hacks / i3 / windows
              
		      
              
              
              
               Sun 6 Nov 2016
                 Erin
              
                
			
		TLDR; I’ve traded in my Mac on a Surface Pro.  Here’s why:

I’ve been whining about Apple and the way they’ve ignored the power users for quite some time now.  I’ve been using Linux for development for several years, and always wanted a way to run Linux as my primary OS.  But the sad truth (for me) is that there are just some things that prevent me from using Linux as my full time operating system.  Email might be the biggest, but there are other apps that are missing or just sub-par.

MacOS was always “close-enough” to Linux that most things worked well.  Docker made things a little more difficult initially, then a little better with the new Docker for Mac.  But it still wasn’t Linux, and it’s hard to argue that developing on the platform you ship to is the right choice.  The OS itself is still visually superior to anything else, but it’s been showing the signs of neglect for a few years now.  It’s clear from Apple’s recent announcements that they are a mobile OS/hardware company that happens to sell computers too.  They’re not sad to lose me, I’m sure.

My article in July about Windows Subsystem for Linux hinted at my excitement about being able to run a solid desktop OS but still do the open source sort of development that really needs to be done on a Linux type operating system.  I abandoned that effort in July because it was still too alpha quality.  Too many things didn’t work.  But it’s November now, several builds later and Microsoft is shipping Ubuntu 16.04.1 in the latest Windows Insider releases.

I took the plunge and bought a Surface Pro 4 when Microsoft announced the trade in program (still good until the 10th of November I think…) to give up to $650 off of a Surface device.  This Surface is just the right size for an airplane tray, has an i7 and 16GB of RAM, and most importantly the Linux subsystem just works for the most part.  I haven’t done anything yet that failed.  I’m sure there are still things that won’t work, but for my primary use – writing Go applications, teaching Kubernetes and Go, hacking on open source projects – it all works.

I was even able to run i3 Window manager again.  No flaws, no errors.  Windows has solid email and calendar applications, and let’s face it; Chrome is Chrome on every OS, and we spend more time there than any other app besides the terminal.  SPEAKING OF THE TERMINAL, Microsoft has done some serious house cleaning there.  The terminal is fast, has true color support, transparency, auto layout correction on resizing, who knows what else has been fixed under the covers?  It’s 80% of what you’d expect from gnome-terminal.  And that’s a far cry from the old CMD.exe days.

I don’t expect to be running X Windows often, when I’m deep in a hacking session I’ll probably open up i3 window manager, it’s still the most productive way to code.  Neovim and vim-go work perfectly in Windows bash, so it’s not a stretch to think I could just have a couple of bash windows open and alt-tab between them.  SSH and SCP work perfectly, and I can still cross-compile Go binaries for any platform (like my Raspberry Pi for my bbq app!).

The most amazing part of all of this is that I simply git cloned my dotfiles from my Ubuntu installs and ran them un-altered.  It’s the same experience, but without the hardware headaches that Linux always brings, nor the lack of good quality applications.

I think Apple has lost its hunger, and Microsoft found it.  The tables have turned from the funny switching campaigns with Justin Long looking hip and making fun of the frumpy John Hodgman.  Today’s Microsoft is a completely different animal.  They’re contributing heavily to open source projects, they’ve opened up the .Net platform, they’re embracing developers and open source enthusiasts openly while Apple counts dollar bills from iPhone sales in a vault in Switzerland somewhere.

I got a lot of amused responses on Twitter when I announced my switch.  This environment may not yet be perfect, but my bet is on Microsoft for the future.  I’m surprised to be saying that, but the evidence is clear that Apple isn’t the company it was under Steve Jobs.  And Microsoft isn’t the company it was under Balmer.  The irony hurts.

image credit wikipedia
 
               
              
              
              
                
                  Tags
                
		
		hacks
		
		i3
		
		windows
		
              
              
              
                
              
            
          
        
        
        
	  
      
      
        
          
          
          
            
              
                Search
                
                  Go!
                
              
            
          
          
	          
          
            
              Tags
            
            

    911
  
    about
  
    author
  
    books
  
    concurrencyt
  
    consulting
  
    contact
  
    corporate-training
  
    css
  
    docker
  
    dune
  
    experience
  
    frontend
  
    generate
  
    go
  
    goa
  
    hacks
  
    hugo
  
    i3
  
    javascript
  
    kubernetes
  
    lets-encrypt
  
    microservices
  
    new-tricks
  
    online
  
    open-source
  
    podcast
  
    privacy
  
    project-review
  
    recipes
  
    release
  
    rescue
  
    speaking
  
    spf13-vim
  
    testimonials
  
    training
  
    windows
  
            
          

          
	            
          
            
              Archive
            
            
            November 2016
             
    Switching - Irony and Operating systems
    
    
September 2016
             
    sync.ErrGroup
    
    
August 2016
             
    Generate All The Things
    
    

     
    Go 1.7 Released
    
    

     
    Career 2.0 - Go Training, Videos, Speaking
    
    
July 2016
             
    Running i3 Window Manager on Bash For Windows
    
    
May 2016
             
    New Tricks - notes as I learn modern front-end development
    
    
April 2016
             
    Old Dogs, New Tricks, and Cognitive Bias
    
    
December 2015
             
    Tasty Worms
    
    
November 2015
             
    Open Source Appreciation
    
    

     
    Caddy And Lets Encrypt
    
    

     
    Speaking Engagements
    
    

     
    Brian Ketelsen
    
    


          
	  
          
          
             Subscribe via RSS feed
          
          
          
          
            
              Follow Me On
            
            
            
                 Twitter
              
              
                 LinkedIn
              
              
                 Google+
              
            
 
	
	
      
    
  









  

    
      
        
          
            Contact Me
          
          
            
                
                +1(813) 434 1484
              
              
                
                me@brianketelsen.com
              
              
                
                Land O'Lakes, FL USA
              
            
      
      
      
        
          
            About Me
          
          Brian Ketelsen provides training and consulting services for Go, Distributed Applications, and Container Technologies.
        
      
      
      
        
          
            Newsletter
          
          Stay up to date with my latest news and course releases by signing up for my low-volume newsletter.
          
          
            
              Email
              
              
                
            
          
        
      
    
    
    
      
        Back To Top 
      
      
        
          Copyright 2016 © Brian Ketelsen
        
        
          Contact Brian
          
      
    
  

  (function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m){i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;i[r]=i[r]||function(){
  (i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();a=s.createElement(o),
  m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)
  })(window,document,'script','https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');

  ga('create', 'UA-46945124-1', 'auto');
  ga('send', 'pageview');


